2152

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES, VOL. 10, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

Precise Synchronization Between LiDAR and
Multiple Cameras for Autonomous Driving:
An Adaptive Approach
Ajay Kumar Gurumadaiah , Jaehyeong Park , Jin-Hee Lee , JeSeok Kim , and Soon Kwon , Member, IEEE

Abstract—LiDAR and camera are crucial perception sensors
that provide complementary information for object detection in
autonomous driving vehicles. However, the fusion of sensor data to
achieve efficient object detection requires accurate calibration and
precise time synchronization between the sensors. While calibration ensures the geometric relationship between the sensors, and
time synchronization ensures that data from both sensors corresponds to the same moment in the real world. Even though various
methods have been introduced to achieve accurate calibration
between LiDAR and camera, time synchronization between sensors remains relatively unexplored. Poor synchronization between
sensors caused by incorrect time stamping process significantly
affects data fusion. Therefore, in this paper we present sensor
time synchronization for LiDAR and camera data fusion approach,
especially in autonomous driving vehicles. It also explores various techniques involved in establishing synchronization between
LiDAR and camera. Subsequently, we propose a hardware level
time synchronization system, including automatic hardware trigger signal delay estimation to precisely match LiDAR and camera
trigger time. Furthermore, validation experiments were conducted
to assess the accuracy of the proposed synchronization system in
various driving scenarios accompanied by detailed experimental
analysis.
Index Terms—Time-synchronization, LiDAR camera fusion,
LiDAR and camera calibration, object detection, autonomous
vehicle.

I. INTRODUCTION
NVIRONMENTAL perception is one of the fundamental
requirements for autonomous vehicles and involves detecting and recognizing objects in three-dimensional space. In
recent research developments, object detection in autonomous
driving using multiple sensor-fusion based method proved to

E

Manuscript received 29 May 2024; revised 24 July 2024; accepted 11 August
2024. Date of publication 21 August 2024; date of current version 15 August
2025. This work was supported in part by the Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology R&D Program funded by the Korea Government (Ministry
of Science and ICT) under Grant 24-IT-01 and in part by Korea Innovation Foundation (INNOPOLIS) funded by the Korea Government (Ministry of Science and
ICT) under Grant 2023-TB-RD-0017 and Grant 2023-DG-RD-0041-02. (Ajay
Kumar Gurumadaiah and Jaehyeong Park are co-first authors.) (Corresponding
author: Soon Kwon.)
Ajay Kumar Gurumadaiah is with the Department of Mining and Explosive
Engineering, Missouri University of Science and Technology, Rolla, MO 65401
USA.
Jaehyeong Park, Jin-Hee Lee, JeSeok Kim, and Soon Kwon are with the
Division of Automotive Technology, Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science
and Technology, Daegu 42988, South Korea (e-mail: soonyk@dgist.ac.kr).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TIV.2024.3444780.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIV.2024.3444780

be more promising than a single type of sensors [1]. More
commonly, autonomous vehicles comprise sensors like LiDAR,
camera, radar, and IMU. Among these sensors, LiDAR and
camera sensors are often employed for object detection during
autonomous driving [2], [3], [4]. Where depth information from
the LiDAR and color information from camera are fused to
realize the object class, size, and distance. Thereby, the accuracy
and reliability of object detection algorithms enhanced by fusion
approach [5], [6], [7].
The most crucial part of LiDAR and camera data fusion is
calibration and synchronization to align LiDAR sensor measurements with the camera [8], [9], [10]. This accurate alignment
ensures that the data from the different modality of sensors
are registered in the same coordinate system, representing the
environment captured at the same instance. Typically, the calibration process involves determining the transformation parameters between the LiDAR sensor coordinate frame and camera
coordinate frame [11]. These transformation parameters include
translation, rotation, and scaling factors that accurately map the
LiDAR measurements to the camera coordinate frame. In the
synchronization process, simultaneous data capturing is established between the LiDAR and camera [12], [13], [14]. Key aspects of the synchronization process are clock synchronization,
time stamping, time alignment, and validation. However, most
LiDAR and camera fusion approaches focus more on calibration,
assuming that captured data were synchronized by default.
However, while it is possible to achieve accurate fusion
of LiDAR and camera data in static scenarios with accurate
calibration parameters, it becomes highly challenging in dynamic scenarios where the ego-vehicle or objects around it
are in motion, leading to significant translational error caused
by improper synchronization between sensors. Without proper
synchronization, sensors capture data at different instances of
the environment and thereby causes significant errors in the
data fusion process [15]. Furthermore, poor synchronization
accuracy directly influences other dependent processes such as
environment perception and localization [16]. Therefore, sensor
synchronization is one of the critical real-time requirements
in autonomous driving to improve the accuracy of object detection and localization through sensor fusion [6]. To address
synchronization issues, several approaches have been introduced in the literature. Some well-known approaches include
hardware-triggering synchronization, software synchronization,
network synchronization, and clock synchronization [16], [17],
[18], [19], [20].

© 2024 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

GURUMADAIAH et al.: PRECISE SYNCHRONIZATION BETWEEN LIDAR AND MULTIPLE CAMERAS FOR AUTONOMOUS DRIVING

Fig. 1.

2153

LiDAR and Camera data fusion data with frames captured in different synchronization approach.

In hardware-triggering synchronization, cameras supported
with hardware triggers are synchronized, which has been proven
to be very promising in achieving precise synchronization. A
similar approach was used in the famous benchmark KITTI
dataset to establish synchronization between LiDAR and camera [21]. In this study, the authors used a mechanically rotating
Velodyne scanner with reed switches attached at the bottom
to trigger the camera when the scanner was facing forward.
However, it should be noted that the mentioned method is
limited to old-fashioned rotating scanners, and it is not feasible to employ this approach with currently available modern
LiDAR as they do not support external mechanical movement.
In the case of software synchronization, using the time stamp
method can solve the asynchronous problem by fusing data
by referring to the timestamp. However, the processing time
overhead makes the solution unsatisfactory for the real-time
performance requirement [22]. For network synchronization,
Precision Time Protocol (PTP) and Network Time Protocol
(NTP) are proposed to perform synchronization between multiple sensors [23]. Though network synchronization synchronizes
the sensors to capture data with respect to common reference
clock source rather than the sensor’s internal clock.
Thus, there is a need for synchronization techniques that
specifically address existing issues and achieve precise synchronization between LiDAR and camera for object detection
in autonomous driving. Therefore, in this work, we propose a
hardware level synchronization technique to facilitate object detection from LiDAR and camera data fusion data. Our significant
contribution to this work can be summarized as follows:
1) We introduce hardware-level synchronization between
LiDAR and camera, along with automatic time delay
estimation and compensation.
2) We conducted a detailed experimental analysis to prove
the significance of the proposed synchronization method

compared to existing method as shown in Fig. 1. Additionally, we evaluated its real-time performance in various
autonomous driving scenarios.
II. RELATED WORK
Precisely perceiving the surrounding environment is one of
the key requirements for achieving safe and reliable autonomy. Generally, perception systems need to maintain continuous
awareness of the surrounding environment, either by processing 2D images acquired from cameras or by processing 3D
point cloud data from LiDAR sensor. However, both sensor
capabilities come with their own limitations, and it is possible
to overcome limitations by fusing information from both sensors [3]. Additionally, various benchmark datasets have been
released for autonomous driving, commonly adopting the LiDAR and camera fusion approach for sensing the surrounding environment. However, such methods are easily affected
by sensor misalignment due to the hard association between
points and pixels established by calibration matrices and precise
synchronization. In the article [4], the authors mentioned that
sensor synchronization is a crucial process for achieving high
accuracy in sensor fusion. Since LiDAR and camera sensors
have different operating frequencies, it becomes challenging to
align the data from both sensors representing the environment at
a specific time. Meeting precise synchronization requirements
for modern autonomous systems, which utilize a wide range
of different sensors with varying triggering and time-stamping
mechanisms, poses a significant challenge. Existing synchronization methods may not fully address these requirements.
Overall, the synchronization methods currently in existence can
be broadly classified into hardware triggering synchronization,
software synchronization, network synchronization and clock
synchronization [6].

2154

A. Hardware Triggering Synchronization
Hardware synchronization is a method used to achieve precise
synchronization between multiple sensors by sending external triggering signals from primary devices to secondary devices [24]. In some cases, an external synchronization control
unit is used to send the triggering signal to multiple devices
to initiate data acquisition from the sensors. More commonly,
cameras equipped with hardware triggering use this approach to
establish synchronization between the sensors. However, despite
the promising performance of the hardware level synchronization approach in the case of multiple cameras, its applicability is
rarely demonstrated in synchronizing LiDAR and cameras due
to the lack of a standard approach to enable hardware triggering
protocols and interfaces. Even though the hardware level synchronization approach introduced by the authors in the KITTI
benchmark dataset [21] proves to be promising in the specific
setup, its applicability is limited to externally rotating mechanical LiDAR and is impossible with modern commercially available LiDAR’s. Moreover, externally mounted reed switches are
mechanical devices that can be susceptible to damage, leading to
potential failure or inaccuracies in the synchronization process.
Also, external reed switches for synchronization limit the flexibility to adjust the synchronization parameters dynamically. This
can be problematic in scenarios where real-time adjustments are
necessary to improve synchronization accuracy.
B. Software Synchronization
Even though software-based synchronization approach offers
several advantages over hardware synchronization approach in
terms of flexibility and applicability, there are certain limitations that make it challenging to meet the real-time requirement in autonomous driving. The synchronization framework
implemented in the ROS system is well-known software-based
synchronizer and is commonly used in real-time sensing applications [14]. Additionally, several methods have been introduced
to improve the efficiency of ROS software-based synchronization [1]. Despite these enhancements, ROS software-based synchronization is limited by poor latency in data transmission and
processing. As ROS operates on distributed system architecture,
the communication between different nodes and the processing
of data can introduce latency, which may affect the real-time
synchronization of LiDAR and camera data. Additionally, the
performance of ROS-based synchronization relies heavily on
the computational capabilities of the system and network conditions, which can further impact accuracy.
C. Network Synchronization
Network synchronization methods typically rely on a centralized clock or timestamping mechanisms to establish a common
time reference across all devices. These methods then synchronize sensor data frames based on the associated timestamps
and ensure that the sensor data from different devices accurately correlated [16]. More commonly, Precision Time Protocol
(PTP) and Network Time Protocol (NTP) are used to establish
network synchronization among the sensing devices. PTP is a
network protocol specifically designed for clock synchronization in distributed systems [25]. It uses hardware timestamps

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES, VOL. 10, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

and the exchange of synchronization messages to achieve submicrosecond accuracy. And it operates in a primary-secondary
architecture, where the primary clock distributes information
to secondary clocks. NTP, on the other hand, is a widely used
protocol for synchronizing clocks over the internet. It operates
in a hierarchical architecture, where a set of time series provides
time information for clients. NTP can achieve synchronization
within milliseconds or even microseconds, depending on the
network conditions [22]. However, network-based synchronization relies on the availability and stability of the network infrastructure. Any network disruptions or fluctuations can affect the
synchronization accuracy and introduce inconsistencies in the
sensor data. Additionally, while network-based synchronization
methods can achieve sub-millisecond to microsecond accuracy,
they may not offer the same level of precision as hardware-based
synchronization methods.
D. Clock Synchronization
Clock synchronization between multiple sensing devices
refers to the process of aligning the timestamps of multiple sensor data to enable accurate sensor fusion. This synchronization
can be archived through various methods including hardware
synchronization, software synchronization, and a combination
of both. In this synchronization method, synchronization among
the clocks enables one clock to correct its time to match with
another clock [22]. However, this synchronization may not be
applicable to LiDAR and camera clock synchronization.
III. PROPOSED APPROACH
The main objective of the proposed sensor synchronization
is to ensure that the data acquired from different sensors corresponds to the same event and has the same timestamp. While
there are well-known benchmark datasets [21] that provide
synchronized data, they involve a series of post-processing
steps and do not guarantee that the sensor-sampled data has the
timestamp corresponding to the same event. However, real-time
perception tasks in autonomous robots require highly precise
synchronization between LiDAR and camera. Mis-synchronized
sensor data contributes to temporal noises in the sensor fusion
algorithm and leads to estimation errors in both translational and
rotational parameters. Motivated by the requirements of existing
autonomous vehicle perception tasks and the limitations of the
existing system, we proposed a synchronization architecture for
LiDAR and camera, along with automatic synchronization delay
correction. This section provides a more detailed description
of the proposed approach, which is divided into the following
subsections: Data collection, Synchronization, Time delay error
modelling, and Multiple camera synchronization.
A. Data Collection and Calibration
1) Data Collection: In this work, the Hesai Pandar 64 channels LiDAR [26] and Flir 2D camera [27] are deployed in the
vehicle sensor kit, as shown in Fig. 2. The sensor kit is attached
to the rooftop of the vehicle to gain the optimal field of view. It
includes three cameras and a 360◦ LiDAR. The internal clocks of
all cameras and the LiDAR sensor are synchronized to the PC
primary clock using PTP. This clock synchronization ensures

GURUMADAIAH et al.: PRECISE SYNCHRONIZATION BETWEEN LIDAR AND MULTIPLE CAMERAS FOR AUTONOMOUS DRIVING

2155

Pl we obtain Pc in the camera coordinate system as follows,

R t
Pl ,
Pc =
0 1

Fig. 2.

Overall architecture design of proposed synchronization system.

that all sensors capture data with respect to a common time
reference.
2) Calibration: The coordinate frame of LiDAR is denoted
as l, and camera frame is denoted as c. We have utilized our
previous work for LiDAR to camera calibration [28] to estimate
the extrinsic parameters between LiDAR and camera. After
estimating the camera intrinsic and LiDAR to camera extrinsic
parameters, 3D points are projected onto the image using a
distortion free projective transformation given by the pinhole
camera model, as shown in the (1).
Pi = Cintrinsic [R/t]Pl

(1)

Where, Pl is a 3D point from the LiDAR point cloud, and
Pi is the projected 2D pixel in the image plane. In (2), Cintrinsic
is the camera intrinsic matrix obtained using the checkerboard
board calibration method. [R / t] represents the LiDAR to camera
extrinsic matrix, which includes rotation and translation matrices describing the change of coordinates from the LiDAR to
the camera coordinate system based on the calibration approach
discussed in the [28].
⎤
⎡
fx 0 cx
⎥
⎢
Cintrinsic = ⎣ 0 fy cy ⎦
(2)
0 0 1
The camera intrinsic matrix Cintrinsic is composed of focal
lengths fx and fy in pixel units, and the principal point (cx , cy ),
which is close to the image center. Meanwhile, [R/t] represents
the joint rotation and translation matrix product of a projective
transformation and a homogeneous transformation. The 3-by-4
projective transformation maps 3D points represented in camera
coordinates to 2D pixels in the image plane and is represented
in normalized camera coordinates as shown in (5).
The homogeneous transformation, encoded by extrinsic parameters R and t, represents the change of basis from the LiDAR
coordinate system l to the camera coordinate system c. Therefore
given the representation of the point P in LiDAR coordinates,

Where the homogeneous transformation is composed of R, a
3-by-3 rotation matrix, and t, a 3-by-1 translation vector.
⎡
⎤
r11 r12 r13 tx

⎢r
⎥
R t
⎢ 21 r22 r23 ty ⎥
(3)
=⎢
⎥
⎣r31 r32 r33 tz ⎦
0 1
0
0
0
1
Therefore,
⎡ ⎤ ⎡
⎤⎡ ⎤
r11 r12 r13 tx
Xc
Xl
⎢ Y ⎥ ⎢r
⎥ ⎢Y ⎥
r
r
t
⎢ c ⎥ ⎢ 21
22
23
y⎥ ⎢ l ⎥
(4)
⎢ ⎥=⎢
⎥⎢ ⎥
⎣ Zc ⎦ ⎣r31 r32 r33 tz ⎦ ⎣ Zl ⎦
1
0
0
0
1
1
Combining the projective transformation and the homogeneous transformation in (4), we obtain the projective transformation that maps 3D points in the LiDAR coordinates into 2D
points in the image plane and normalized camera coordinates:
⎡ ⎤ ⎡
⎤
x1
Xc /Zc
⎢ ⎥ ⎢
⎥
Zc ⎣y 1 ⎦ = ⎣ Yc /Zc ⎦
1
Zc /Zc
Putting the intrinsic and extrinsic components together, we can
expand the projection equation Pi = Cintrinsic [R/t]Pl as shown
in (5).
⎡ ⎤
⎡ ⎤ ⎡
⎤⎡
⎤ Xl
1
u
r11 r12 r13 tx ⎢ ⎥
fx 0 cx
⎢ 1⎥ ⎢
⎥⎢
⎥ ⎢ Yl ⎥
⎣v ⎦ = ⎣ 0 fy cy ⎦ ⎣r21 r22 r23 ty ⎦ ⎢ ⎥ (5)
⎣ Zl ⎦
1
0 0 1
r31 r32 r33 tz
1
Where, (u 1 , v 1 ) represents the projected 3D points in the image
coordinates.
B. Synchronization
In the proposed approach, synchronization between the LiDAR and camera was established using the hardware triggering
approach. Due to the operating frequency of the LiDAR being
much slower than that of the camera, we chose the LiDAR as the
reference for time synchronization. The LiDAR sends a trigger
signal to the camera to enable capturing within a specific LiDAR FOV. The basic structure of the proposed synchronization
method is mainly consists of three modes: Data acquisition, Data
alignment, and Time delay correction.
1) Frame Capturing: In the data acquisition mode, the internal clocks of the LiDAR and camera are synchronized with
IEEE PTP [26] to maintain a common time source among the
multiple sensors. By default, the LiDAR and camera stamp the
captured data with their respective internal clock. However, it
is not possible to align data from multiple sensors by referring
to the timestamp from their internal clock sources. Therefore,
establishing a common clock source among the sensors using
PTP facilitates the alignment of frames based on timestamps
during the fusion process. With Precision Time Protocol (PTP)
network, clock synchronization of LiDAR and camera systems
is attainable through a shared timebase.

2156

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES, VOL. 10, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

Algorithm 1: Adaptive Dynamic Time Delay Estimation
and Trigger Offset Correction.

Fig. 3.
matrix.

Projection of LiDAR points on image plane using transformation

Assuming t L represents the timestamp for a LiDAR data
point, and t C represents the timestamp for a corresponding
camera frame referenced from the PTP common clock source.
Also the association of timestamps along with the sensor data
can be written in vector form as (6) and (7).
Ls = (Xi

Yi

Zi ),

tL
i

(6)

Where Ls represents the single LiDAR scan, with i points,
and each point carries a PTP time stamp tiL .
Cf = (u

v),

tC
i

(7)

Where Cf is the camera frame with PTP timestamp tiC for the i
frame. Unlike LiDAR, the timestamp is included for each frame,
not for each pixel. After capturing the data from the sensors
synchronized using the PTP network, the LiDAR point cloud is
aligned onto the corresponding image frame using the projection
matrix described below as shown in Fig. 3.
n

pd , t d =

(Cf − project(Ls ))

(8)

n=i

Where project maps Lidar points on to image plane using the
transformation matrix described in the (5).
n

1
1
L
pd , t d =
−
(u v), tC
(u
v
),
t
i
i
i=1
n

pd =
i=1
n

td =
i=1



Input: Image frame Cf = [(u, v), tC
i ] and LiDAR scan
]
Ls = [(Xi , Yi , Zi ), tL
i
Output: Trigger delay offset Δtd Initialisation:
Δtd =initial offset delay, pthr =projection error
threshold, tthr =time gap threshold
1: for each LiDAR scan Ls do
2:
Trigger camera with Δtd
3:
Project Ls onto Cf & Compute pd , td
4:
Case: Static object
5:
if pd ≥ pthr then
6:
Re do calibration...
7:
end if
8:
Case: Dynamic object
9:
if td ≥ tthr then
10:
Adjust the camera trigger offset
11:
Δtd = ±td
12:
end if
13: end for
14: return Δtd

(u − u1 )2 + (v − v 1 )2
n

C
tL
i − ti
n

pd is the average projection error and td is the observed
average time delay between the LiDAR point timestamp and
camera frame timestamp over n frames. Where n represents the
number of frames acquired during specific interval, in our case
it is set every 2 minutes with 1200 frames approximately.
2) Reference Time Measurement: Without a specific reference point, accurately estimating pd and td may not always be
possible. This challenge arises from the difference in the nature
of data acquisition between LiDAR and camera sensors. While
LiDAR captures a comprehensive 360◦ view of the environment
in a single scan, the camera can only capture limited portions
of it. Moreover, the timestamps associated with LiDAR scans
and camera images represent different instances: the camera
timestamp marks when the image frame was captured, whereas
the LiDAR timestamp indicates when the LiDAR completed

one scan. As a result, finding a precise LiDAR point timestamp
that aligns with the camera frame timestamp for comparison
becomes difficult, affecting the accuracy of pd and td .
Hence, in the proposed method, we identify the specific
instantaneous LiDAR reference point with respect to the center
of the camera image by projecting LiDAR points onto the image,
as illustrated in Fig. 4. After projection, the vertical(φ) and
horizontal (θ) LiDAR angles of the points projects onto or near
the center of the image are calculated as follows:
φ = atan2(Y, X)

θ = atan2(Z, (X2 , Y2 ))
Further, pd and td corresponding points are estimated for points
closer to the image center. With our experimental vehicle, the LiDAR 18th vertical channel aligns with the camera image center
at horizontal sweeping angles θmiddle = 180.00 , θleft ! = 358.40 ,
and θright = 276.80 for the middle, left, and right cameras, respectively. These specific horizontal sweeping angles are then
used as a reference point to initiate the trigger signal from the
LiDAR to the camera.
3) Time Delay Correction: Initially, the camera is set with an
initial triggering offset Δtd to commence the camera exposure
upon receiving the LiDAR trigger signal specific to the field
of view that aligns with the respective camera. Upon receiving
the camera frame Cf , the LiDAR scan Ls is projected onto the
camera using the projection matrix. Even though the LiDAR
being able to send a trigger signal directly to the camera, there
will always be a significant offset between the camera and
LiDAR capture times. This offset is caused by the FOV mismatch
between the camera and LiDAR, as well as internal processes
within the camera and signal transmission delays. In the proposed method, the LiDAR reference time and camera reference
time are continuously matched and compensation parameter are
calculated in real time to adjust the camera capturing time, as
indicated in the algorithm’s sequence of processes.

GURUMADAIAH et al.: PRECISE SYNCHRONIZATION BETWEEN LIDAR AND MULTIPLE CAMERAS FOR AUTONOMOUS DRIVING

Fig. 4.

Estimating the reference point in the LiDAR scan for each associated camera.

Fig. 5.

Synchronization architecture for multiple camera.
Fig. 6.

In the case of multiple cameras, the trigger signal from the
LiDAR is generated for each camera at different LiDAR FOVs,
and the delay is computed based on the three LiDAR reference
points with respect to each camera. As shown in Fig. 5, trigger
signals from the different LiDAR FOVs are generated and sent
to the camera. The correction module modulates the trigger
signal, adding the required delay compensation estimated from
the proposed approach as flow depicted in Algorithm 1.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
To verify the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm, extensive experimentation was performed with different scenarios
on real road in Technopolis town, located Daegu city, South
Korea. The sensor installation setup on the vehicle is shown
in Fig. 6. The sensor kit installed on the top of the vehicle
includes a Pandar 64 3D LiDAR (Hesai Technology, Shanghai,
China) with 360◦ horizontal field of view and 40◦ vertical field,
placed in the middle of the sensor kit. Three Blackfly S Gig
E machine vision cameras (Teledyne Flir, Wilsonville, Oregon,
U.S) are positioned in the middle, left, and right of the sensor

2157

Vehicle sensor kit installed with LiDAR and camera.

kit. Throughout the experiments, the LiDAR sensor operated
at 10Hz frequency, while the camera operated at different frequencies, up to a maximum of 30Hz.For each synchronization
method, LiDAR and camera data were captured for 45 minutes,
comprising 27,000 frames across 4 trials, where “trials” refers
to instances of the data collection process. The system and
sensors were restarted between each trial by turning off the
input power.
The efficiency of synchronization between the LiDAR and
camera was observed during object movement and at different distances. Hence, we experimented with multiple scenarios
involving dynamic objects with varying speeds and distances.
Initially, stopped the ego-vehicle and recorded moving vehicle
at multiple constant speeds from a consistent distance to understand the effect of synchronization with respect to moving
vehicle. Furthermore, ego-vehicles drove at a constant speed
and recorded other vehicles moving at various speeds and
distances. Additionally, we conducted a comparison analysis

2158

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES, VOL. 10, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

⎤
⎤
⎡ img
img
lidar
xnormal ∗ Zcam
Xcam
⎢ img
⎢ img ⎥
lidar ⎥
⎦
⎣ Ycam ⎦ = ⎣ ynormal ∗ Zcam
img
lidar
Zcam
1 ∗ Zcam
⎡

Fig. 7.

Projection of point in image coordinate to world coordinate.

between various time synchronization approaches, including
software synchronization, network synchronization, and hardware level synchronization, to verify the significance of the
proposed method.
A. Evaluation Metrics
In the sensor fusion approach, synchronization between LiDAR and camera sensors is crucial for efficient environmental
perception in many applications. Assessing the synchronization
system is essential to ensure accuracy and reliability within the
context of the application domain. In the context of autonomous
driving, achieving efficient synchronization between the sensors
is particularly challenging due to numerous factors such as
capturing time, frame drop resulting from network overload,
and projection errors.
1) Time Gap: The time gap td represents the difference in
time between the LiDAR reference timestamp and the corresponding camera frame timestamp.
C
td = tL
i − ti

(9)

C
Where, tL
i and ti represents the LiDAR point and camera frame
timestamps, respectively.
2) Frame Loss Percentage: Frame loss within the LiDAR
and cameras synchronization system is one of the significant
factors directly affecting the system’s accuracy. These instances
of frame loss often occur due to factors such as network overload,
timing mismatches, temperature effects, power fluctuations, and
processing limitations. The percentage of frame loss is estimated
for every 2 minutes using the following equation:

Frameloss =

Desiredframes − Recievedframes
× 100
Desiredframes

(10)

3) Projection Error in World Coordinate: Projection error
between the LiDAR and camera data involves estimating the
Euclidean distance between the 3D points in the world coordinate system and converted 3D coordinates of 2D pixels in image
coordinates. Converting camera pixels to world coordinates
involves utilizing the camera calibration parameters and depth
information provided by the LiDAR sensor as shown in the
Fig. 7.
⎡ img ⎤
⎤−1 ⎡
⎤
⎡
xnormal
ximg
fx 0 cx
⎢ img ⎥
⎥ ⎢
⎥
⎢
⎣ ynormal ⎦ = ⎣ 0 fy cy ⎦ ⎣y img ⎦
1
0 0 1
1

lidar
is obtained from the LiDAR point data and the
Where Zcam
extrinsic rotation matrix R and translation vector t, as shown
below:
⎤
⎡
⎡
⎤
⎤ X lidar
⎡
lidar
Xcam
r11 r12 r13 tx ⎢ lidar ⎥
⎢ lidar ⎥
⎥
⎥ ⎢Y
⎢
⎣ Ycam ⎦ = ⎣r21 r22 r23 ty ⎦ ⎢ lidar ⎥
⎦
⎣
Z
lidar
Zcam
r31 r32 r33 tz
1

N
1
img
lidar )2
pd 3D =
(Pcam
− Pcam
(11)
i=1
N
As illustrated in Fig. 7, the projection error between the LiDAR
and camera frames is estimated in the 3D coordinate frame.
First, the selected LiDAR point P lidar (X lidar , Y lidar , Z lidar ) is
lidar
lidar
lidar
lidar
(Xcam
, Ycam
, Zcam
)
transformed to the camera coordinate Pcam
and the corresponding pixel in the camera image is restored in
3D. The 3D projection error is calculated using (11).
4) Projection Error in Pixel Coordinate: The projection error is computed between the center of the bounding box coordinates of the detected object from the projected LiDAR
lidar
lidar
lidar
points Pimg
(Ximg
, Yimg
) and the point P img (X img , Y img ) in the
camera image coordinate using the (12). The equation calculates
the root mean square of the Euclidean distances between the
corresponding LiDAR and camera points, providing a measure
of the accuracy of the projection alignment. A lower projection
error indicates a more accurate alignment between the LiDAR
and camera frame.

N
1
lidar − P img )2
(Pimg
(12)
pd 2D =
i=1
N

B. Synchronization Approach
1) Software Synchronization: For software synchronization,
a well-known and commonly used ROS-based time synchronization method was adopted and tested with recorded camera
and LiDAR data. The ROS system synchronizes the data according to the order received in the node. The callback functions registered in the ROS system trigger whenever there is
LiDAR and camera data. However, this method only considers the data arrival time at the computer, instead of capture
time; hence, it does not guarantee that the received sensor data
represents the same state of the world. Also, as the number
of sensors increases, the system introduces critical time deviations due to poor transmission latency. Fig. 8 shows the
fusion data of LiDAR and camera captured using the ROS-based
software-based time synchronization method. The left side of
the images presents the static and dynamic scenarios, while
the right side of the images demonstrates the synchronization
effect on moving vehicle in different directions, with different
speeds.
Table I presents the projection error and time gap error estimated by projecting LiDAR points onto the camera image using
the projection matrix obtained through the calibration process.
The mean and variance of the distance error linearly increase
with respect to the speed of the moving object, while the time
gap between the frames remains the same.

GURUMADAIAH et al.: PRECISE SYNCHRONIZATION BETWEEN LIDAR AND MULTIPLE CAMERAS FOR AUTONOMOUS DRIVING

Fig. 8. Fusion of LiDAR and camera frames captured in software synchronization mode.

2159

Fig. 10. Fusion of LiDAR and camera frames captured in hardware triggering synchronization mode.

TABLE I
EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION OF A SOFTWARE SYNCHRONIZATION APPROACH

Fig. 11. Fusion of LiDAR and camera frames captured in proposed synchronization mode.

Fig. 9. Fusion of LiDAR and camera frames captured in network synchronization mode.

2) Network Synchronization: In case of network synchronization, the LiDAR and camera are synchronized using IEEE
1588 PTP, with the processor set as the primary and the camera
and LiDAR set as secondary. Despite adjusting the camera’s
internal clock according to the LiDAR primary clock, the capturing time of each sensor is not synchronized. However, it is
possible to align the closest camera frame with the LiDAR frame
by checking the timestamp associated with each LiDAR camera
frame. Although increasing the frame rate of the camera would
be beneficial for capturing much closer frame, a random time
gap error still affects the synchronization accuracy. Moreover,
in case of multiple camera synchronization, higher bandwidth
increases the likelihood of data transmission delays, which
further amplifies the synchronization errors. Fig. 9 presents the
projection of LiDAR points onto camera images, and Table II
presents the statistical analysis of projection error, time gap, and
frame loss observed in network synchronization mode.

3) Hardware Trigger-Based Synchronization: As discussed
in the previous, the hardware-based triggering approach emerges
as the most promising alternative for addressing the issues highlighted in software and network-based synchronization methods.
In this approach, the LiDAR and camera are integrated into a
hardware synchronization system, where the LiDAR sends an
external trigger signal to the camera to initiate the capture. While
hardware triggering approach offers several advantages, it also
comes with certain limitations that directly affect on synchronization accuracy. Achieving high precision in synchronization
time is challenging due to the latency between the trigger signal
and the actual capturing time of the camera, which impacts the
alignment accuracy. Although it is possible to mitigate latency
issues by configuring constant compensation parameters, these
parameters may fluctuate over time due to factors such as processing overhead and sensor temperature. Therefore, a hardware
triggering-based synchronization approach with dynamic delay
compensation would be ideal for achieving precise LiDAR and
camera synchronization in various applications.
The statistical analysis presented in Table III illustrates the
projection error and time gap error estimated from the frames
captured over a duration of 30 mins. Fig. 10 shows projection of
LiDAR points on camera image caputued in hardware triggering
mode. The estimated mean and variance of the projection error
consistently increase over time, particularly in relation to the
speed of the moving object.
4) Hardware Triggering With Delay Compensation: Addressing the limitations of the synchronization approach based
on hardware triggering, the proposed method introduces automatic delay compensation to mitigate dynamic latency issues
arising from various factors. In the proposed method, the time
gap between the LiDAR and camera frames is observed at

2160

Fig. 12.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES, VOL. 10, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

Comparison of the mean and variance of projection error when surrounding objects, captured at different speeds using four synchronization approaches.

TABLE II
EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION OF A NETWORK SYNCHRONIZATION APPROACH

TABLE III
EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION OF A HARDWARE-TRIGGERING
SYNCHRONIZATION APPROACH

TABLE IV
EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION OF A PROPOSED SYNCHRONIZATION APPROACH

regular intervals, and precise compensation parameters are computed to adjust the synchronization accordingly.
Table IV presents the results of the experimental analysis
conducted with the proposed hardware triggering with delay

compensation approach, aimed at improving synchronization
accuracy. Delay compensation is computed whenever there is
a time gap between LiDAR and camera frames exceeding a
predefined threshold. The camera trigger signal is then generated
based on the estimated compensation parameter to initiate the
capturing. Fig. 11 shows the projection output of LiDAR points
on camera image captured in proposed synchronization mode.
V. RESULTS & DISCUSSION
Derived from the experimental analyses conducted under
critical scenarios that significantly impact the fusion of LiDAR
and camera data for surrounding environment perception in
autonomous driving, the proposed approach proves promising
in addressing various challenges. The ideal fusion LiDAR and
camera data was achieved with the proposed approach, irrespective of the surrounding object speeds and distances, without
requiring any additional hardware interfaces.
Furthermore, the synchronization module can identify and
rectify the time gap between the LiDAR and multiple cameras
in real-time. The quantitative comparisons of the mean and variance of the projection error plot in Figs. 12 and 13 shows a very
small errors in the proposed hardware-based triggering method
compared to the other three synchronization approaches. While
the software synchronization-based method proves to be more
prone to projection error due to the random selection of LiDAR
and camera frames based on the ROS software callback function.
In the case of network synchronization, though theoretically
timestamp-based frame matching appears promising, its performance is affected in real-time applications, especially when the
system involves multiple sensors, due to network overload and
transmission delays. In the case of hardware triggering-based
synchronization approach, it is found to be a potential solution
to address synchronization issues. However, variations in the
trigger signal transmission and small delays in data transmission
from the sensor contribute to error accumulation in the projection. Finally, in the proposed synchronization approach, realtime monitoring and delay correction significantly improved
synchronization accuracy by reducing projection errors to less
than 10 cm.
VI. CONCLUSION
To address the challenge of LiDAR and multiple camera
synchronization for the benefit of sensor fusion-based algorithms in the autonomous driving domain, a precise time

GURUMADAIAH et al.: PRECISE SYNCHRONIZATION BETWEEN LIDAR AND MULTIPLE CAMERAS FOR AUTONOMOUS DRIVING

2161

Fig. 13.

Comparison of the mean and variance of projection error when surrounding objects, captured at different distances using four synchronization approaches.

Fig. 14.

Comparison of the estimated frames time gap and frame loss among four synchronization approaches.

synchronization approach is introduced. The proposed approach
offers detailed insight into the practical challenges involved
in establishing precise synchronization among multiple sensors used for environment perception in autonomous driving.
Building upon existing synchronization approaches, our method
aims to eliminate key limitations that directly impact the overall
accuracy of data fusion. Based on a hardware synchronization architecture, the proposed real-time delay estimation and
correction algorithm significantly improve fusion accuracy by
reducing the projection error to less than 10 cm. Extensive
experimental analysis performed to evaluate the significance
of our proposed synchronization approach along with existing
synchronization approaches. Comparing with the existing synchronization approach, the significance of the proposed method
is demonstrated through key challenging scenarios that would
significantly impact synchronization accuracy. Additionally, we
provided an analysis of frame loss rates among the other four
synchronization approaches in comparison with our proposed
approach as shown in Fig. 14. Overall, the practical applicability
of our proposed system is demonstrated in an urban scenario
with a real vehicle equipped with Level 4 autonomous driving
technology.

REFERENCES
[1] H. Hu, J. Wu, and Z. Xiong, “A soft time synchronization framework for multi-sensors in autonomous localization and navigation,”
in Proc. 2018 IEEE/ASME Int. Conf. Adv. Intell. Mechatron., 2018,
pp. 694–699.

[2] N. Kaempchen and K. C. J. Dietmayer, “Data synchronization strategies for multi-sensor fusion,” 2003. [Online]. Available: https://api.
semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:15483874
[3] Z. Wang, Y. Wu, and Q. Niu, “Multi-sensor fusion in automated driving:
A survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 2847–2868, 2020.
[4] H. Cho, Y.-W. Seo, B. V. K. V. Kumar, and R. R. Rajkumar, “A multisensor fusion system for moving object detection and tracking in urban
driving environments,” in Proc. 2014 IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Automat.,
2014, pp. 1836–1843.
[5] M. Liang, B. Yang, Y. Chen, R. Hu, and R. Urtasun, “Multi-task multisensor fusion for 3D object detection,” in Proc. 2019 IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020, pp. 7337–7345.
[6] B. Shahian Jahromi, T. Tulabandhula, and S. Cetin, “Real-time hybrid
multi-sensor fusion framework for perception in autonomous vehicles,”
Sensors, vol. 19, no. 20, 2019, Art. no. 4357. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/19/20/4357
[7] H. Yoon, M. Jang, J. Huh, J. Kang, and S. Lee, “Multiple sensor synchronization with therealsense RGB-D camera,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 18,
2021, Art. no. 6276. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/14248220/21/18/6276
[8] Y. Li et al., “DeepFusion: LiDAR-camera deep fusion for multi-modal 3D
object detection,” in Proc. 2019 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., 2022, pp. 17182–17191.
[9] S. Schneider, M. Himmelsbach, T. Luettel, and H.-J. Wuensche, “Fusing
vision and LiDAR - synchronization, correction and occlusion reasoning,”
in Proc. 2010 IEEE Intell. Veh. Symp., 2010, pp. 388–393.
[10] H. G. Norbye, “Camera-LiDAR sensor fusion in real time for autonomous
surface vehicles,” M.S. thesis, Norwegian Univ. Sci. Technol., Trondheim, Norway, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://folk.ntnu.no/edmundfo/
msc2019-2020/norbye-lidar-camera-reduced.pdf
[11] P. An et al., “Geometric calibration for LiDAR-camera system fusing
3D-2D and 3D–3D point correspondences,” Opt. Exp., vol. 28, no. 2,
pp. 2122–2141, Jan. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://opg.optica.org/oe/
abstract.cfm?URI=oe-28-2-2122
[12] L. Yang, Q. Jia, R. Wang, J. Cao, and W. Shi, “HydraView: A synchronized
360◦ -view of multiple sensors for autonomous vehicles,” in Proc. IEEE
2020 Int. Conf. Connected Auton. Driving, 2020, pp. 53–61.

2162

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES, VOL. 10, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

[13] H. Usami, H. Saito, J. A. Kawai, and N. Itani, “Synchronizing 3D point
cloud from 3D scene flow estimation with 3D LiDAR and RGB camera,”
Electron. Imag., vol. 2018, 2018, Art. no.426. [Online]. Available: https:
//api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:69443235
[14] A. Noda, Y. Yamakawa, and M. Ishikawa, “Frame synchronization for
networked high-speed vision systems,” in Proc. IEEE SENSORS, 2014,
pp. 269–272.
[15] E. Olson, “A passive solution to the sensor synchronization problem,” in Proc. 2010 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2010,
pp. 1059–1064.
[16] F. Sivrikaya and B. Yener, “Time synchronization in sensor networks: A
survey,” IEEE Netw., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 45–50, Jul./Aug. 2004.
[17] M. Faizullin, A. Kornilova, and G. Ferrer, “Open-source LiDAR time
synchronization system by mimicking GNSS-clock,” in Proc. 2022 IEEE
Int. Symp. Precis. Clock Synchronization Meas., Control, Commun., 2022,
pp. 1–5.
[18] K. Yuan, L. Ding, M. Abdelfattah, and Z. J. Wang, “LiCaS3: A simple
LiDAR–camera self-supervised synchronization method,” IEEE Trans.
Robot., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 3203–3218, Oct. 2022.
[19] L. Fridman, D. E. Brown, W. Angell, I. Abdić, B. Reimer, and
H. Y. Noh, “Automated synchronization of driving data using vibration and steering events,” Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 75, pp. 9–15,
May 2016, doi: 10.1016/j.patrec.2016.02.011.
[20] A. Rangesh, K. Yuen, R. K. Satzoda, R. N. Rajaram, P. Gunaratne, and M.
M. Trivedi, “A multimodal, full-surround vehicular testbed for naturalistic
studies and benchmarking: Design, calibration and deployment,” 2019,
arXiv:1709.07502.
[21] A. Geiger, P. Lenz, C. Stiller, and R. Urtasun, “Vision meets robotics: The
KITTI dataset,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 32, no. 11, pp. 1231–1237, 2013,
doi: 10.1177/0278364913491297.
[22] Q. Li and D. Rus, “Global clock synchronization in sensor networks,” in
Proc. IEEE INFOCOM, 2004, vol. 1, Art. no. 574.
[23] D. Mills, “Internet time synchronization: The network time protocol,”
IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 39, no. 10, pp. 1482–1493, Oct. 1991.
[24] P. Hyla, “Multi camera triggering and synchronization issue : Case study,”
J. KONES, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 193–200, 2016. [Online]. Available: https:
//api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:189955402
[25] S. Liu et al., “The matter of time–A general and efficient system for precise
sensor synchronization in robotic computing,” 2021, arXiv:2103.16045.
[26] Hesai Pandar, “Pandar 64 lidar sensor, Hesai technology (NASDAQ:
HSAI),” Shanghai, Palo Alto and Stuttgart, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.hesaitech.com/downloads/#pandar64/UserManual.pdf
[27] FLIR Balck Fly S, “Teledyne technologies,” Wilsonville, OR, USA,
1978. [Online]. Available: https://www.flir.eu/products/blackfly-s-gige/
?vertical=machinevision&segment=iis
[28] G. A. Kumar, J. H. Lee, J. Hwang, J. Park, S. H. Youn, and S. Kwon,
“LiDAR and camera fusion approach for object distance estimation in selfdriving vehicles,” Symmetry, vol. 12, no. 2, 2020, Art. no. 324. [Online].
Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2073-8994/12/2/324

Jaehyeong Park received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
in electronic control engineering from the Daegu University of Korea, Gyeongsan, South Korea. He is currently a Researcher with the Division of Automotive
Technology, Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science
and Technology (DGIST), Daegu, South Korea. His
research interests include deep learning-based scene
perception, autonomous driving, and sensor fusion.

Ajay Kumar Gurumadaiah received the bachelor’s
and master’s degrees from the Department of Computer Science, University of Mysore, Mysore, India,
in 2012, and the Ph.D. degree from Chung-Ang University, Seoul, South Korea, in 2018. From 2018 to
2023, he was with the Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute
of Science and Technology, Daegu, South Korea, as
a Postdoctoral Researcher in the Future Automotive
Division. His research interests include autonomous
vehicles (including UAVs and UGVs), SLAM, map
matching, IMU odometry, sensor fusion, and deep
learning.

Soon Kwon (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in electric & electronic engineering from Korea
University, Seoul, South Korea, in 2003, and the M.S.
degree in electronic engineering from Seoul National
University, Seoul, in 2006. Since 2006, he has been
with the Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and
Technology, where he is currently a Principal Researcher with the Division of Automotive Technology. His research interests include deep learningbased scene perception and autonomous driving, realtime stereo vision, parallel processing, and visual
sensing system.

Jin-Hee Lee received the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in
computer and information engineering from the Inha
University of Korea, Incheon, South Korea. She is
currently a Senior Researcher with the Division of
Automotive Technology, Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute
of Science and Technology, Daegu, South Korea. Her
research interests include deep learning-based scene
perception, autonomous driving, and sensor fusion.

JeSeok Kim received the Ph.D. degree from the Department of Automotive Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul, South Korea, in 2015. He is currently
a Senior Researcher with the Division of Automotive
Technology, and Director of AI.Drive Research Lab,
Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology, Daegu, South Korea. He is also a Board Member
of the Institute of Embedded Engineering of Korea.
His research interests include path planning, vehicle
control, and autonomous vehicle.

